# User Defined Networks

## Introduction

User Defined Networks (UDNs) in OVN-Kubernetes offer flexible network configurations
for users, going beyond the traditional single default network model for all pods
within a Kubernetes cluster. This feature addresses the diverse and advanced networking
requirements of various applications and use cases.

## Motivation

Traditional Kubernetes networking, which typically connects all pods to a default Layer3 network,
lacks the necessary flexibility for many modern use cases and advanced network capabilities.
UDNs provide several key advantages:

* **Workload/Tenant Isolation**: UDNs enable the grouping of different application
types into isolated networks within the cluster, preventing communication between them.
* **Flexible Network Topologies**: Users can create different types of overlay networks
that suits their use cases and then attach their workloads to these networks which are
then isolated natively.
* **Overlapping Pod IPs**: UDNs allow the creation of multiple networks within a cluster that
can use the same IP address ranges for pods, expanding deployment scenarios.

See the [enhancement] for more details.

[enhancement]: https://ovn-kubernetes.io/okeps/okep-5193-user-defined-networks/

### User-Stories/Use-Cases

See the [user-stories] defined in the enhancement.

[user-stories]: https://ovn-kubernetes.io/okeps/okep-5193-user-defined-networks/#user-storiesuse-cases

## How to enable this feature on an OVN-Kubernetes cluster?

This feature is enabled by default on all OVN-Kubernetes clusters.
You don't need to do anything extra to start using this feature.
There is a Feature Config option `--enable-network-segmentation` under
`OVNKubernetesFeatureConfig` config that can be used to disable this
feature. However note that disabling the feature will not remove
existing CRs in the cluster. This feature has to be enabled along with
the flag for multiple-networks `--enable-multi-network` since UDNs
use Network Attachment Definitions as underlying implementation detail
construct and reuse the secondary network controllers.

## Workflow Description

A tenant consists of one or more namespaces in a cluster. Network segmentation
can be achieved by attaching 1 or more namespaces as part of same network which
are then not reachable from other namespaces in the cluster that are not part
of that network.

## Implementation Details

### User facing API Changes

The implementation of UDNs introduces two new Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs)
for network creation:

* Namespace-scoped **UserDefinedNetwork** (UDN): This CRD is for tenant owners,
allowing them to create networks within their namespace. This provides isolation
for their namespaces from other tenants' namespaces.

* Cluster-scoped **ClusterUserDefinedNetwork** (CUDN): This CRD provides cluster
administrators with the ability to allow multiple namespaces to be part of the
same network that is then isolated from other networks.

**NOTE**: For a namespace to be considered for UDN creation, it must be
labeled with `k8s.ovn.org/primary-user-defined-network` at the time of its
creation. This label cannot be updated later, and if absent, the namespace
will not be considered for UDN creation.

Provide a sample CRD/API.

### OVN-Kubernetes Implementation Details

Keep in mind goal is to educate users how this feature
was implemented in OVN-Kubernetes in this section.

What were the changes made to ovn-kubernetes control plane and
data plane to make this happen? Note differences if any for local
gateway versus shared gateway and default mode versus interconnect
mode. **A detailed OVN-Kubernetes networking topology diagram is a must
to showcase how this feature works in our CNI**. Remember that a picture
can speak a thousand words. Give details on how the above API is watched
and converted into OVN objects by OVN-Kubernetes. If there are changes
done on host-networking level like adding new routes they must
be highlighted.

#### OVN Constructs created in the databases

What were the OVN Objects used? Give snippets and details on
the various database objects that this feature creates in the
OVN NBDB and SBDB. Keep in mind goal is to educate users how this
feature was implemented using OVN in this section. You can go as deep
as you want like mentioning how the pipelines get executed
for your feature.

Provide sample nbctl commands to view the constructs and show the output.

#### OVS Flows generated

Provide details on specific changes done to br-ex, br-int or how
the relevant openflows generated by this feature look like.
Keep in mind goal is to educate users how this
feature was implemented using OVS in this section.

Provide sample ofctl commands to view the flows and show the output.

## Troubleshooting

Include details on how the end user can know if the
feature is correctly configured here? What are the different
ways to troubleshoot this feature?

* What metrics, alerts were added to warn users something has gone wrong?
* Debugging notes

## Best Practices

* Write best practices to be used/recommended for smooth or better
functioning of the feature if any; example "using namespaceSelectors"
will scale better than using "podSelectors" because flows generated will
be less for former than latter etc.

## Future Items

Add a bullet list of future plans if any

## Known Limitations

Add a bullet list of known limitations if any

## References

Provide links or other relevant details outside of
this documentation that you think end users should read.
If there were useful github discussions, public google docs
enhancement proposals etc they must be mentioned in this section
